---
layout: post
title: "Update from the Field: On Loss, cont'd & Epilogue"
date: 2023-07-16
---
Update from the Field: On Loss, cont’d & Epilogue


<b>Trigger warning</b>: I describe scenes of violence and death and use strong language (including expletives) in some parts. All names have been changed, with the exception of Rebecca, whom I talk about at the end.

<b>Length warning</b>: This piece is incredibly long. It is self-indulgent. You are not obliged to read any of it of course, but I am grateful if you do. This is just my way of sharing with you how things are, because I am so awful at writing otherwise. It is also the last piece in this “Update from the Field” series. If you are receiving this note, it is because either you have received past updates or because I thought of you and felt you might be interested. Don’t feel like you have to write back, but if you do, even a few words, I will be very happy to hear from you.

***
Seven days after Reza’s sister was killed, he came back to the office. The grief in his eyes was a bottomless depth that I had never seen before. No words of condolences seemed adequate.

I was not in Kabul when it happened, but even hearing second-hand accounts from other colleagues, it was heart-wrenching. Three gunmen stormed Kabul University, Afghanistan’s largest university in <a href="https://www.nytimes.com/2020/11/02/world/asia/kabul-university-attack.html">November 2020</a>, holding its students and staff hostage. They then systematically went around the campus, killing at least 19 people and wounding another 20 until Afghan security forces and American troops killed the assailants. ISIS later claimed responsibility. Reza’s sister was said to have been shot in the stomach, dying on the spot shortly after. Colleagues told me that when Reza learned of the siege, he instinctively knew that his sister was in danger and wanted to go find her on campus. They stopped him. Reza is Hazara, an ethnic group that is primarily Shia Muslim, historically marginalized. Extremist groups like ISIS believe that they are heretic and have targeted them in multiple attacks.

I don’t know how anyone moves on from something so devastating, but slowly, that dark heavy cloud of grief over Reza lightened, at least to the external eye, and life continued.

That was the Afghanistan I knew, even before the Taliban took over in the summer of 2021 — never too far from a tragedy, yet mind-blowingly resilient from these trials and tribulations. In the 2.5 years I spent in Afghanistan, I have held my colleague Fahad in my arms when he broke down after his son fell into a coma and almost died of meningitis; I have listened to Amir’s voice crack when he told me that he didn’t want to go into retirement because all he could do was think about his dead son at home. His son, traveling near the Iranian border with his colleagues from the government bank, had their car stopped by the Taliban. They killed them on the spot, tossing their bodies into a ditch. Amir found out about it hours later on Facebook. He told me that he had lost at least 10 (?) family members in the decades of war in the country.

Every colleague I knew either had personally fled at one point or has at least one family member still living overseas. Our driver in Herat, Naeem, one of the gentlest, most fun-loving people I have met — his brother had been living in Ukraine for years when Russia invaded in February 2022. He said his brother called him, hiding from air raids. I can’t even imagine having to flee one war, let alone fleeing one just to end up in another.

***

When people ask me whether I had personally faced a dangerous situation living in these conflict-affected places — Congo, Afghanistan — I never know what to say. Afghanistan was, of course, one giant dangerous situation, but the reality was that, as privileged international aid workers, I was incredibly sheltered from the daily violence that my Afghan colleagues and their families faced.

The closest I had come to the realities of war was that morning when I woke up to a rapid succession of RPG sounds (rocket-propelled grenades) in Kabul. Barely awake, still trying to figure out whether it was the usual fireworks (that was confusingly common in Kabul), or, actual rockets, we beelined into the safe room to wait it out. We later learned that a good 20 some RPGs flew over our heads, fired from 1km west of our house, landing 1km east of us downtown.

Or that time, early in my career, when I travelled with truckloads of seeds for a distribution to displaced families during the rainy season in LRA territory (Lord’s Resistance Army), northern Congo, not far from the then-Sudanese border. Torrential rain and mud — 120km took us three days. We spent the first night on the floor of a village chapel. The second night, passing through a Congolese army outpost late at night after spending hours to get out of a ditch, the soldiers told us it was unsafe to continue the road in the night in rebel territory. We parked next to their camp. I slept fitfully on top of the piles of seeds on the truck, under the stars, hearing the ticking of bugs among the seeds all night. The next morning, we arrived at Duru, a small village, seeing a few women walking along the path with a dazed look in their eyes. We learned that the LRA had attacked the night before, abducting a few people. My friend from Human Rights Watch, incidentally in town at the same time, later found their mutilated bodies outside the village and photographed them for evidence. Duru had just experienced a gruesome attack by the LRA the year before (<a href="https://www.hrw.org/report/2009/02/16/christmas-massacres/lra-attacks-civilians-northern-congo">link</a>).

These incidents make for great stories over beer, so-called “badges of honor” that make you a humanitarian aid worker who has “seen real shit.” But, truth be told, even though it may have been stressful at the moment, I had never (yes, thankfully) been in a situation of real danger.

Armored vehicles, walled compounds. I don’t know what I have done to earn that kind of privilege. We don’t like to admit it, but some lives really do matter more than others. At least that seems to be the message we are sending.

And yet, here I am, living in Montreal (more on that later), regularly waking up in the middle of the night to deeply troubling nightmares — sometimes set in Afghanistan, Congo — of things that I had never lived through. I wake up startled, somewhat disoriented, a bit of an out-of-body experience for a few seconds, and fall back asleep — sometimes jumping straight into another nightmare. My psychiatrist says it is a mild form of PTSD (don’t worry, I am fine, very functional, and am properly dealing with it). But what right do I even have to experience PTSD? My medically-untrained interpretation is that my brain is subconsciously processing these intense experiences from Congo, from Afghanistan — a bit of a healthy unravelling, now that I am living in a “normal” place with a somewhat routine lifestyle after over a decade overseas. And if I, only having lived on the edges of conflict, am experiencing this, how do my Afghan, Congolese, Nigerian, Cameroonian colleagues cope with the trauma they live through daily?

***

It has been three years since I wrote an update. So much has happened in these three years, but I struggled to put words on paper.

I titled this update “Epilogue” because more likely than not, this will be my last update, at least in this format, in this series of “field updates,” if I could ostentatiously call such sporadic writing a “series.”

Don’t worry, I am not going anywhere, but I have properly hung up my field boots and this chapter of “life on the field” is coming to an end, or a pause at least. I’d like to keep writing, but I don’t really know what format it will take, and I honestly don’t know whether this new chapter in life will lend itself much to this kind of introspection. There is something about being in a small town, in a remote part of Congo, <i>A Bend in the River</i> Naipaul style, or staring into the Hindu Kush mountains, or the stillness of the Atacama Desert that forces you to confront your inner self.

Three years ago, I wrote from Afghanistan — having just taken a breather from the most intense period I had ever experienced in my professional life, managing our humanitarian and development programs through Covid. Two work-days packed into one for months on end: one during the normal working hours in Afghanistan, the other when my colleagues whom we had sent home out of precaution started their work day in North America. Contingencies after contingencies after contingencies. It sucked for everyone in Afghanistan and in North America. I had never worked so hard in my life.

In a recent job interview, my interviewer asked me, “So, what did you learn about yourself during Covid?” I joked to my friends that I barely had any time to sleep, let alone learn anything about myself. In reality, however, I did learn something: I just couldn’t do that lifestyle, that work anymore. I still found it deeply compelling, but I just couldn’t do it anymore. I craved community, a home of sorts. I had built up a global community of friends from the years of living and working overseas that I am grateful for and still really treasure. Yet, as my friends got married, had children, and transitioned to a more settled lifestyle one by one, I found that I envied what they had. I enjoyed visiting them, meeting their spouses, playing uncle to their children, but I also began to realize that if their lives were a movie reel, then I was just a frame in it. In France, Brussels, DC, New York, Vancouver…they welcomed me with open arms whenever I visited. We recounted memories of our past shared lives over drinks and sumptuous food, but their lives reverted back to their routines after I left. I wanted to have my own routines, to have people I could call up for a drink where I lived. I wanted my own movie reel, but I couldn’t figure out what it would look like.

In truth, I had started realizing it years before — I had dabbled in the idea of living in Edinburgh, Brussels, etc., but nothing stuck. They were all fantastic places and I recognized that I was in a position of privilege to even be able to entertain these options. Yet, all of them made sense and none of them made sense. There was no real personal reason that compelled me to be in one place over another.

The nagging feeling of rootlessness came to a head with Covid. I wrote about it last time (<a href="https://onwardjho.github.io/blog/2020/08/31/onwardjho-update-field-202008">link</a>), so I won’t belabor the point. Long story short — with Hong Kong, my “psychological” home, down in political flames, borders closing, flights cancelling, I just didn’t feel like I had anywhere I <i><b>could</b></i> go.

***

Most people decide to make one drastic life change maybe once or twice in their lives, if ever, but somehow, in the classic fashion of how I live, I decided that I would do an entire makeover all at once: I applied to law school, bought a home, dropped my decade plus of an itinerant lifestyle, and moved to Montreal. With the political changes in Hong Kong, with my grandma’s passing during Covid — the last of my grandparents — with my storage of belongings in Hong Kong finally packed up and sent to Canada, Montreal became home. Here I am, a little over halfway through law school — perhaps too late to regret my life choices — writing on a lovely summer day by the Lachine Canal in Montreal, where I have called home the past two years.

Any kind of life change requires some mental gymnastics to get yourself adjusted, but I couldn’t have asked for a better place to anchor myself. Montreal is a fantastic city (winters can be rough, but even then, it pales in comparison with waking up in the morning in the depths of the harsh Afghan winters without central heating). I have enjoyed being in a city where friends can come visit, where folks come through for work and we can catch up over dinner.

I am grateful that I am able to have a home here. Having a space of my own, without an expiry date looming over me the first time in my life, after years of moving around, has done wonders for my mental well-being. People think of the amazing things you get out of traveling — you do, and for which I am grateful — but few realize how disruptive a life of constant travel can be. It is amazing how simple routines can have this power of grounding you — buying bread from the same boulangerie, getting my haircuts from the same barber, my 10-minute walk to the metro… I am experiencing physiological changes too from being able to shop for my own groceries regularly, eat better, run along the canal, and bike by the river.

Last summer, I went on a long trip to Europe to visit friends I hadn’t seen since Covid. It was lovely, but halfway through, I found myself craving to return home. I have no real desire to travel anywhere these days, at least for the time being. I joke that maybe I’ve finally “grown up.” I am thankful for all the places and people I have had the chance to get to know, but for now, I am relishing the stability of being in one place. I don’t know how long this feeling will last, for how long I will be in Montreal, but I am content.

It feels weird to say that law school is the break I have needed, because — don’t get me wrong — law school is really intense, far more than I had anticipated. But it really does feel that way: it feels like my mind and body are repairing itself from the years on the road.

***

I am sure these life changes come off as a bit rash, but in reality, it has been a long time coming. Catching up over quesadillas in Kampala, my friend Natalie and I bemoaned the insanity of humanitarian aid work. We had met in Congo, working for different organizations (she later joined me in Afghanistan — our friendship has stayed unscathed from that experience, thankfully). I was 3+ years into living overseas, having recently resigned from my job at a mining company in Congo and in the middle of an epic road trip through Central, East, and Southern African. We both loved and hated the aid work — there was so much potential to do good, yet so much absurdity and toxicity. Recently Brandon, a friend from graduate school, recounted something that another friend, then working with Save the Children had said, “I wish saving children had more to do with children and less to do with spreadsheets.” That line reminded me of the conversation I had with Natalie over dinner. Humanitarian aid work was spending days on end banging your head over the most banal problems (like finding rope, as the movie <a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=I7-c66mbzXA">"A Perfect Day"</a>, set in the Balkans War, so accurately describes).

Natalie told me recently that it was at that dinner when I had already mentioned the idea of going to law school. I don’t remember it, but I will take her word for it (because apparently I also cannot remember how we first met). Of course it took another nine years, seven more countries, before I actually ended up in law school.

I remember starting seriously thinking about it in late 2017 in Chile. I was deeply unhappy in my job. I ended up back in humanitarian aid, at first somewhat half-heartedly, going on one short-term assignment after another. Eventually, I landed in Afghanistan, where three months turned into 2.5 years. It was after an episode of a heartbreak, sitting in my friend Maya’s room in Herat, distraught, and a sufficient dose of pep talk from her that made me submit an application to McGill Law. The rest is history.

So, even though it does sound rash, it was the result of a long deliberative process, with input from a lot of wise friends and mentors — deep reflection of what I wanted professionally and personally, after having the good fortune of living and working in these extraordinary places, with these outstanding people I have come to call friends.

***

Law school came at the best of times and the worst of times. Admitted in 2020 when I was in Afghanistan, I had to defer a year — borders were closing on us, flights were cancelled for months, we were busier than we had ever been at work. There was just no way I could have moved.

With an extra year in Afghanistan, my planned departure coincided with the US’s withdrawal from the country. Violence had gradually escalated in the years before Trump signed the fateful <a href="https://www.nytimes.com/2020/02/29/world/asia/us-taliban-deal.html">agreement</a> with the Taliban. The government was steadily losing ground across the country. The months leading up to the withdrawal were tense — the writing was on the wall, but even if we had expected the dominos to fall, none of us thought they would fall so quickly.

I left Kabul in late June, working remotely from Montreal as I wrapped up. I was chained to my desk in the nights as I tried to work hours that overlapped with the Afghanistan team. In the day, I was hooked to my phone, scrolling through every Twitter update about the country.

Then, it happened. A few days after I handed over responsibilities to my successor, Kabul fell. The Taliban swept across the country like wildfire and the provincial capitals fell like paper tigers. On <a href="https://www.nytimes.com/2021/08/15/world/asia/afghanistan-taliban-kabul-surrender.html">August 15</a>, Taliban entered into Kabul with little fanfare. It was a <i>fait accompli</i>. I was sick to my stomach. Well-intentioned messages from friends saying that they were glad I got out in time irked me — leaving early, even though I had planned it a year ago, felt like my betrayal to Afghanistan, and there was nothing I wanted more than to be there with the team, even though rationally there was nothing I could do and I would just be a liability.

Shortly after the country fell to the Taliban, I received a constant stream of messages from colleagues asking me how they could flee and what country might host them. A few Western governments had started vaguely talking about resettling Afghans. Because many of our projects were funded by the US, Canadian & UK governments, our staff implored the organization to advocate to our donor governments to evacuate them. Our local team was overwhelmed with requests to submit resettlement applications on their behalf. Our HR manager, Afghan, was fleeing himself. We were trying to get international staff out of the country. It was pure chaos.

So, a couple of weeks after I closed my work computer, I reopened it, this time to help process the hundreds of requests we received from current and past employees and submit applications on their behalf to the relevant governments. With a team of staff working remotely, I worked from August to November 2021, into my first semester at law school. We processed around 400 requests. It was the most mind-numbing, soul-crushing task I had ever done. The work was purely administrative — compiling identity documents, checking application forms, drafting letters, but it was the constant “no” or “I don’t know” that I had to communicate to staff that crushed me.

As soon as applications were submitted, there was little we could do. Governments around the world had made irresponsible promises they could not and would not keep — raising the hopes of many and then cruelly crushing them. There was no meaningful process. Mailboxes of Afghan resettlement processing teams of different immigration units were clogged with hundreds of thousands of emails. You were lucky if you received an automated response. Most people never heard anything back. The only government that corresponded with us directly was New Zealand, but only to say that none of the twenty some applications we submitted were eligible.

The Afghanistan I knew was synonymous with tragedy, but people were always resilient, generous, and hospitable — celebrating holidays & birthdays, sharing meals. Life continued with hardship in the backdrop. All of a sudden, colleagues were sending me desperate messages wanting to know when they might hear back from the US or Canadian governments. People were consulting me over their impossible decisions of whether to stay put, lay low, wait and see, or pack up their bags and flee to Pakistan by road. A female colleague told me she almost fled, until she realized the opportunity presented to her was a human trafficking scam. I had no satisfying response for them.

In reality, there was little we could do as an organization once the applications were sent in. It was a black box. We advocated at all levels, even with the head of our organization involved. Out of the 400 some applications we submitted, to date, few have heard anything back. Those who managed to leave pulled their own strings. In the heat of emotions, a journalist friend on the ground reproached me for not doing more, “Listen, I am a freelancer and I managed to get people out, and I am definitely judging the organization here. Very irresponsible.”

She was not wrong, but we all banged our heads for solutions and there was nothing more we could do. Yes, there were people being evacuated, but it was a caste system: those with foreign passports first, then those with individual connections. Those who were able to squeeze through the crowd and get on the plane. The rest was pure luck, and luck was random with no rhyme or reason. NGO staff who worked on projects that wasn’t in “sensitive” sectors (e.g., promoting democracy, female empowerment), like us, were not a priority. I don’t want to make excuses for our collective failure (by “collective” I mean everyone involved in Afghanistan), but we had 400 people trying to leave. Even if we did have a way to charter a plane to get a few dozen people out — which we did not — how were we supposed to pick? How were we to explain to Abdul that we picked Najib’s family over his? We were in no position to assess who faced a greater risk than the others. It was an impossible situation.

There was the leaving, and then there was the getting there. My colleague, Mahdi, languished with his son and his wife for eight months on a US military base outside of Afghanistan waiting for his clearance to be resettled. He was the most cheerful, optimistic person I had met in Afghanistan. At some point, he messaged to tell me that he thought his wife might die at the camp. They eventually made it to the US in November 2022.

And then there was getting settled in. Some colleagues who landed in the US/Canada have found jobs in their fields of expertise and are doing well. Many are still struggling. Nine months after arriving in the US, Mahdi is still without a job. Not even a cleaning job. He and his wife recently welcomed a second child. Just this morning, I had a long conversation with another colleague contemplating coming to Canada to give him the reality check of being an immigrant. You want your Afghan colleagues to leave and when they do have an opportunity, you have to tell them that they need to be prepared to scrub toilets for years. The world is a cruel, unjust place.

So, even if I did have the power to get all 400 people out of the country, how could I make that decision for them? It was not a decision for me to make, and, at any rate, I was nothing more than a paper pusher.

***

The whole episode has been a giant heartburn that I am still getting through. I don’t know if I will ever get over that sour feeling of witnessing this chaos from afar and being so deeply entangled with it.

It has also given me a bitter after taste with aid in general. I was and still am proud of the work we did in Afghanistan, but half of our portfolio was supporting education for girls in rural Afghanistan. The current state of things makes a mockery of everything we have accomplished.

But even more than that, the conversations I had with USAID over the design of a major project months before the Taliban takeover were some of the most delusional ones I have ever had. Living behind their heavily fortified compounds, interacting mostly with senior government officials, these government aid staff (US and other countries alike) have concocted a version of Afghanistan that had little to do with reality. They pushed a state-building, peacebuilding narrative that was ludicrous — not even in hindsight, but at that very moment. I have worked in many low income, conflict-affected countries, but Afghanistan was the biggest basket case of aid I had ever seen. It still enrages me when I think of those conversations and I don’t know how I can recover from the feeling of being complicit in such nonsense.

On a more personal level, I also resented the privilege of being able to extract myself from chaos at a moment’s notice, just because of the passport I hold. As I wrote <a href="https://onwardjho.github.io/blog/2020/08/31/onwardjho-update-field-202008">last time</a>, this work might be a “cause” for us international staff, but it is the lives of my Afghan colleagues. Lives from which they cannot pick up and leave. When they do, it is out of pure desperation.

In the midst of the chaos, my boss in Afghanistan had to deal with getting cats out of the country, cats that some international colleagues had brought into the country when they moved there. <b><i>Cats!</i></b> Can you imagine? Here we were telling people left and right that we could not get them out of the country, and we were asking the same people to look into getting <b><i>fucking</i></b> cats out of the country. It was an absurd level of cognitive dissonance and white privilege that makes me furious, yet the very same privilege I enjoyed when I lived there.

In no way is this an indictment on aid work as a whole. There is a whole lot of smart, compassionate people in the aid sector, conscious of their privilege, trying to make things better. Many of them are my close friends. The deeply flawed sector and the structural, institutional problems that extend beyond aid doesn’t mean that I think aid work needs to go away. It is important work that has a tangible positive impact on people who are really struggling. It needs to be done. I just can’t stomach it anymore, at least for now.

***

And this is why I say that law school came at the best of times. It has given me the space to process this heartburn. I came to law school looking for something very practical — a set of tools to look at issues that I had dealt with in my career from a different perspective — but I have found myself absorbed in the law at an intellectual level. I found that I enjoyed dissecting legal issues, looking for the right tools to deal with them.

I sometimes find the law frustratingly narrow-minded. Just as a graduate school professor (who has been a mentor over the years and went to law school themselves) had warned me, people in the legal profession can have very narrow apertures of the world. I still cringe at the guest speaker I heard last year, speaking on business & human rights. She said, “I don’t think you can have a conversation about human rights without lawyers in the room.” Human rights activists all around the world do their work courageously, often without any lawyers in the room. Those who experience human rights impacts and abuses are the ones who best understand what are human rights. I would argue that the lawyer in the room is the least equipped to have that conversation. That tone-deaf statement astonished me, stuck with me, and reminded me to always step out of my lawyer hat and be a real person. Of course, there are also many many very brilliant people in the law I have met who are not like that at all.

Still, I like the neatness of legal questions (i.e., "What is the law?" “What should the law be” is, of course, a far messier question, as the same mentor-professor pointed out). Compared to dealing with intractable questions of conflict and governance, the law just seemed like a refreshing change. I don’t know that law will be my forever career path — going to law school for 3.5 years is the longest I have ever planned anything in my life, but for now, I can see a legal career for myself.

Something must be going alright, because it is the longest stretch I have ever stayed away from looking at job openings on <a href="https://reliefweb.int/">Reliefweb</a>.

***

As I stood at the concerts in the <a href="https://www.festivalnuitsdafrique.com/">Festival International Nuits d’Afrique</a> last week in Montreal, the Congolese rumba, the African drums, the melodies sang in different African languages, they transported me back to Africa. I remember that first weekend after I arrived in Kinshasa at Black & White, a glitzy club downtown, where I shook hands with Papa Wemba (<a href="https://www.bbc.com/news/entertainment-arts-36123214">who has since passed away</a>). I remember riding a bus out of Yaoundé with a friend I had just met a few weeks prior to his home village, Santa, sharing a tight bed with his siblings. I remember those rolling verdant hills of Masisi, North Kivu, that you could mistake for Switzerland. I remember going on a clandestine trip to see the okapis in the deep forests of Congo. Above all, I remember the kindness of everyone who welcomed me with open arms, the confidence that they put on me, that I had most certainty not earned, for the work I did.

I lived my 20s and early 30s seeking experiences to broaden my horizons and I am grateful for those opportunities which have transformed the way I see the world, people, and myself. I know I will miss international work. I miss the friends I have made along the way (and hope to continue seeing you!). I miss my peers at SAIS, who have an insatiable curiosity for the world and continue to do work that inspires me.

But for now, I am content where I am, happy to explore this new adventure in the law and see where it leads.

***

I titled this piece “On Loss” just like my last piece. I started with a story of loss and I want to end with another one. Late March this year, a former colleague and friend, <a href="https://www.niefuneralhomes.com/memorials/rebecca-hiemstra/5162248/">Rebecca</a>, with whom I worked in Afghanistan, took her life. I was her supervisor, so I wasn’t her closest friend, but in a place like Afghanistan where you lived and worked together 24/7, you quickly become family. Rebecca was smart, funny, hardworking, tenacious, and eternally positive. I used to joke that her enthusiasm wore me out. She died at the age of 32. Her death, too soon, shocked all of us to the core. A globe trotter, Rebecca had friends all around the world. We each grieved individually where we were. It was nice to be able to grieve collectively when we came together for her memorial service in Michigan this past May. Rebecca’s positivity kept my aid cynicism in check. Her energy will continue to be infectious for all of us despite her passing.

You never know what others are dealing with. If you ever are struggling, know that you have a listening ear with me even if we haven’t spoken in a while. I think of you all regularly — I am just a terrible correspondent.

***

Thanks for reading my self-indulgent musings all these years — from the very first piece in 2009. I hope to continue writing in some other way. I don’t know what it will look like, but in the meantime, please do stay in touch. If you find yourself in this part of the world, please do let me know and I can show you where to find the best bagels in the world (yes, Montreal bagels are superior to New York ones).

Best,

Joseph

 

PS: Here are pictures of Lachine Canal and St. Lawrence River, from where I wrote part of this piece.

PS: If you are interested in reading the past updates, here are the last three:

<a href="https://onwardjho.github.io/blog/2020/08/31/onwardjho-update-field-202008">Update from the Field: On Loss (August 2020)</a>

<a href="https://onwardjho.github.io/blog/2020/02/09/onwardjho-update-field-202002">Update from the Field: 10(+) Years Later (February 2020)</a>

<a href="https://onwardjho.github.io/blog/2017/01/01/onwardjho-update-field-201701">A Year in Review: 2016</a>
