---
layout: post
title: "A Year in Review: 2016"
date: 2017-01-01
---
If there were anything in common between the snow-capped peaks of Patagonia and the vast arid Atacama Desert, it would be the stillness that nature offers you – without noise, distraction, contamination.  In that stillness, you cultivate an extraordinary sense of self-awareness that allows you to reveal a great deal about yourself.

The beginning of 2016 could not have been more different than the end of it: On January 1, I was in the small Patagonian town of Puyuhuapi surrounded by the awe-inspiring Chilean fjords and rugged mountains.  On December 31, I was in my apartment in the dusty mining town of Calama in the Atacama Desert, the driest place on earth.  The sharp contrast of the two landscapes mirrored how 2016 panned out – it was a year of highs and lows, a year from the liberty of funemployment back to the trappings of life in a full-time job.  Yet, amidst all of these changes, the theme was remarkably consistent – it was a year of self-discovery and personal growth.

A very good friend of mine who is going through a significant life change of moving back to the US from a field-based job recently asked me my thoughts on her change.  I told her that figuring out one’s direction in life is a continuous process that never ends.  At certain moments, it is a thoughtful process where one ponders and thinks about the big existential questions of life, and at other times, it is a bit chaotic, like the Brownian motion: you bump into one wall that sends you bouncing off in a completely different direction, just to hit another wall that sends you elsewhere again.  For me, 2016 was a bit of wall-bouncing, but mostly it had been a year of thoughtful introspection.

In September 2015, I left my job in Phoenix, resolute in starting afresh.  I travelled a bit in Brazil and ended up in Argentina, where I fell completely in love (with the place), and a month turned into six.  I camped, hiked, and hitchhiked through Patagonia, and made Buenos Aires my home for a few months.  Along the way, I met good people who have become dear friends and put my head to learning Spanish, something that I had wanted to do ever since my first trip to Latin America in 2007.  Those months were fantastic – I had become so accustomed to putting work as my first priority that it took a good part of the last few months of 2015 to actually let go completely, and then, I finally felt liberated, rested, and re-energized.  2016 was also the first year I hadn’t stepped foot onto the African continent probably since 2007.  With seven years of working on Congo issues, three of which I lived in the country, leaving my job and coming to South America felt like closing a significant chapter in life, and I anointed it with a little tattoo of Congo/Africa on my back for my 30th birthday (credits to Martin Asca).

Stepping into my 30s, I felt like I was turning a new page in life.  It was not so much the age than the circumstances in which I turned 30 that made it seem like a stark departure from the last decade: I was in a new continent, I left a job, I was speaking a new language, and for the first time in probably five years, I celebrated my birthday outside of Congo and not at work, surrounded by new friends I had made in a city that excited me.  I looked back to my 20s and was grateful for a decade of experiences and adventures I had from Yaoundé to Kinshasa to Goma to Dungu to Lubumbashi/Fungurume and then to the dense equatorial forests of Papua.  It was a decade well spent, where I had exclusively focused my energy in getting out of my comfort zone to learn new things, people, culture, and expanding my horizon.  My worldview dramatically changed over those ten years from all the new things I was exposed to while breaking out of my bubble in Hong Kong to study in the US, and then, through a series of fortuitous events landed in Africa.  It was a decade when I constantly craved for new experiences the more I fed myself with it, and, in that process, I developed a deeper understanding of myself.

As I looked ahead, at 30, having had the good fortune of seeing 50+ countries, I finally felt that I wanted different things in life.  Yes, there were still places I wanted to see – Iran, Myanmar, Brazil, etc., but more than anything, I want to dig deeper on issues I care about, I want to build closer and more profound relationships with people who mattered, I want to use my skills and experiences to make an impact, and I want to be in places that are conducive to putting personal happiness as a priority.  I resolved that my 30s would orbit around three main things: people, nature, and balance.

And so when I made the decision to move to Calama, Chile, to go back and work for the company I had just left, it seemed completely at odds with what I had said I wanted in this new decade of life.  I was going back to a routine of long working hours and doing more or less the same thing I had been doing the past five to six years.  Some around me were skeptical and questioned my decision – they sensed the hesitation that I had myself.  But it made sense, and I had always done what made sense.  From Cameroon to Congo, from China Studies to African Studies, even though to an outsider my trajectory seemed spontaneous, to me, there was always a rational logic to it.  True, I was not afraid to take risks, but it had always been a calculated spontaneity.  I had been to Calama for a visit in February before I made the decision to move there, and I knew what I was signing up for.  Although it ran somewhat against what I had resolved for myself only a couple months back, it made sense – I wanted to stay in Latin America and the opportunity allowed me to gain professional experience in my field while breaking into a geographical region that was competitive.  I knew what I wanted to get out of it and it was a means to an end.  On top of that, while the months on sabbatical had given me fuel, I hadn’t quite figured out what this new direction might look like.  This opportunity didn’t seem like such a bad idea.  I told myself exactly what I had told myself when I moved to Phoenix three years back: I’ve lived in worse places before, I can do this for a while.

It was true.  For all the bad rap that Calama gets, I have yet to dislike the place.  I think in large part it has to do with living where I actually work – after 2.5-3 years of incessant flying when I was based in Phoenix, I was happy to be in one place where my furthest work travel was 3 hours by road to a village on the Bolivian border.  There have been other bright spots too: For one, I have been energized by working directly with communities again, something that I had missed being based in Phoenix.  For another, my Spanish has improved exponentially over the course of seven months being here – now I feel comfortable in professional settings.

Yet, overall, on a professional level, for a variety of reasons, some unanticipated, which I will not get into here, things have been a bit disappointing.  On the whole, I would describe work as frenetic but underwhelming.  I had always been in professional environments where I constantly felt challenged and was pushed to grow, yet here, I have been feeling underutilized and uninspired.

In spite of all, and without sounding like I am trying to over-rationalize this, I still feel strongly that the decision to come here made sense.  What has lacked on a professional level, I have somewhat made up for it with the newfound space and time that I have to take a step back and take stock of what I have learned from the past six years of working in this field.  There was also an added advantage of being in Chile: it offered me a very useful comparative perspective that has helped me crystallize some thoughts and observations I have made about the so-called “corporate social responsibility” field (coming).  But most of all, it has conclusively made me realize that I have just grown out of this type of work in this role, and when I eventually do leave here, I will feel that I can appropriately close this chapter of my life having had the opportunity to see/work at all four overseas operations of the company.  While I may still only have a fuzzy idea of what lies ahead, I feel that through all of it, I now have a clearer sense of who I am, what I care about, and where I might want to devote my energy into in the future.

I am not sure what is in store for 2017, and I am not even sure if another change is in the air for this coming year, or maybe the next.  For now, I am thinking, planning, exploring, and seeking for a new opportunity.  What I do know is that in 2017, despite the distance, I am going to make it a priority to catch up with people who matter in person, and I hope we’ll have that opportunity.

Wishing you a new year full of happiness, health, and personal growth, surrounded by friends and family.

An additional note: 2016 has also been a year of making new friends.  An especially big shoutout to Maryana, Martin, Rodrigo, Vincent, Lucia, Mélanie, Fabri, Guido, Meli, Pato, Hilly & Chris, among many others.

Here is a short recap of 2016:

- Best book: 2016 was not year of a lot of books, partly because I banned myself from reading any English books for a few months while learning Spanish, and partly because of the move to a new place and job. Among the books I did read, two stood out: When Breath Becomes Air (Paul Kalanithi) and Behind the Beautiful Forevers (Katherine Boo).
- # Countries visited: 7 – Argentina, Uruguay, Canada, China, USA, Chile & Mexico.
- New countries: 1 – Uruguay.
- Carbon footprint: 25 legs of flights
