---
layout: post
title: "Update from the Field II, Kinshasa"
date: 2009-09-02
--
Hello All!

Meet Skol, the building cat at Av. Malemba Nkundu. Don’t let her looks fool you, she’s really not a particularly nice cat. She has learnt my schedule well so that every morning, before work and every day after work, she comes by to my apartment and asks for food. But when I try to pet her, she turns around and tries to bite me or claw me. My neighbor, who saw her as a kitty a year ago around the apartment complex and who named her after the local beer, Skol, has found an explanation for her defensiveness, particularly when you touch her belly: she may be pregnant. I don’t know if I believe this, or if I want to think that she’s just mean-spirited. We shall see.

Monday marks exactly my first month in Kinshasa, the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Much has transpired over the past month, so I thought it might warrant an e-mail to give a little update about my life here.

Upon my second weekend here , I visited the famous Bonobo Sanctuary an hour outside of urban Kinshasa. The bonobos are an endangered species that can only be found in a limited part of rainforested DR Congo. This Sanctuary was founded by some researchers who took it on to study this species and contribute to wildlife conservation. Now, you may ask, what is so special about these bonobos? The bonobos are the closest primates to human beings, in fact, 99.7% genetically similar to us. Once you see them, you will say that they’re really just humans – only with better feet, and much more liberal. I say that because the bonobos have feet that look like hands (imagine being able to type a letter while frying an egg!!), and they spend all day having sex with anyone, any age, any sex. Actually, they use sex as a means of conflict resolution. Who said human beings are smarter???

Our pleasant Sunday soon turned downhill as we started our first beer during lunch beside the one meter tall Lukaya Waterfalls (waterfalls, really?). My first little excursion in Kinshasa was then followed by my baptism in Kinshasa’s famous nightlife. Let me just say that, I will not go out again on a Sunday night. What a painful Monday. (A side note for those of you who have not been to the continent. Yes, you can get drunk on beer. Beer bottles are 72cl. here. That’s as much as a bottle of red wine!)

Speaking of Kinshasa nightlife, however, I really must say that it lives up to its reputation. Kinshasa nightlife never disappoints. I daresay I’ve never been to clubs with better ambiance, better DJs than in Kinshasa. Really, any place where bars and clubs are still crowded at 2am on Monday morning should not be taken lightly… Going out in Kinshasa is a serious business – people dress posh, very very very posh, they spend, and they dance like they’re all qualified to be on stage. In fact, there is an amusing name that goes with this very elegant class of night-owls – sapeurs, where “sape” is an abbreviation for “Société d’ambiancieuse personne elegante” (which loosely translates to a society of elegant people who creates ambiance). I swear I did not make this up!

With a good night of fun, also comes with a good night of expenses. I may have mentioned this in my last e-mail, but Kinshasa is really, really, really, really expensive. And when I say expensive, I mean London expensive. A night out with some drinks, taking taxis, dinner, you could easily, easily spend $50+. Yes, $50! I scream oh-my-god together with you. I literally feel like I am bleeding through my lowly stipend every time I go out. Thank god weekends are only once a week. I have the mild suspicion that Kinois (pronounced “kinwa”, the nickname for inhabitants of Kinshasa) actually save up money JUST go out in a posh manner. It certainly fits into that sapeur reputation – one will do anything to keep up that posh, elegant image. Expat places are certainly outrageously expensive, but even the local haunts are not at all cheap. My favorite game recently is to make people guess how much a box of cereal is in the supermarket. (answer at the bottom of the e-mail). You may think that because everything is imported and marked up for expats in the supermarkets, the prices are so outrageous (shopping at the supermarket is another experience, which I shall save for another time). Only partially true – because of the horrible state of roads in the country, the multiple “intermediate” fees (bribes?) one needs to pay along the road, and the erosion of the agriculture sector by the mining industry, even local produce is expensive in urban Kinshasa. I just spent an afternoon at a local market doing some informal market surveys for an agroenterprise project, and we found that the mamas sell beans coming from China, Tanzania, Rwanda, etc – their prices are the same as locally produced beans in the adjacent province, Bas Congo!

Two and a half weeks after my stay in Kinshasa, I finally managed to take a glimpse at the legendary Congo River, a very difficult sight in Kinshasa because of the state’s concern for security being a national border with Congo-Brazzaville (the other Congo, the Republic of the Congo).

Do you have Congolese friends, you may ask. Meeting people has been a particularly big challenge, even a month into my arrival in Kinshasa, partially because of the unresolved drivers’ license ordeal. I have now heard two versions regarding the delay in my obtaining this said license – the printer at the issuing department broke down, hence they closed the department; there have been too many fakes on the street (since when is fake ID a concern in the DRC???!), hence they closed the department. Either way, I’ve chosen to find it rather amusing that the solution is to lock the doors of the department and ignore the need of issuing license for a month or two. Nonetheless, my lack of mobility has made life rather inconvenient, and made it particularly difficult for me to meet people. Fortunately, thanks to my neighbor, a fantastic person who runs the War Child office in Kinshasa, I met D, my first Congolese friend in Kinshasa. And yes, how much more classic can it get than to have a local hip hop artist as your first Congolese friend? Kinshasa never ceases to surprise.

So, it is through D that I got to know more about Kinshasa, got to see different parts of town outside of the huge and claustrophobic Gombé (expat) district, got to learn to play pool at this local bar out in Kintambo with his friends, some hip hop dancer, some drummer, and some MONUC employee, and got to dance even more at Congolese clubs. D is a talented rising artist in Kinshasa who is currently working with War Child on a brilliant project where they use music to engage children out in Cité d’Espoir, an IDP (internally displaced people) camp just 45 minutes outside of urban Kinshasa. I paid a visit to the site one weekend and must say I was thoroughly impressed by War Child’s engagements with the community.

It seems that my life here is just all fun. That is not at all true! Of course, I will save you of slow days when I am trapped at home with no means of transport to go anywhere…or the many days I’ve been using my headlamp while I cook in the kitchen because the light only flickers, once every few hours…or the very uncomfortable position I’ve set myself in just so that I could get the right Internet connection to send this e-mail out… Nonetheless, life is well here, and I am slowly getting used to making Kinshasa another home.

On the work front, things are advancing well. Admittedly, the first month has been slow. I am really not much of an 8-5.30 office person, so when I finally went out for my first partner’s meeting, I literally felt like a cage out of a bird. Woohoo! The first month I’ve spent most of my time mapping out our projects in the country – not a particularly exciting task, but whenever a map is produced, people seem to get excited because maps are so hard to come by in this country, so I get excited too. A consultant just arrived the past weekend to help us on an agribusiness enterprise proposal. This is going to be my main preoccupation in the few weeks to come, which also means I will finally get a chance to travel out of the city for a bit and visit the field. (yay!) I also finally learnt everyone’s name in the office, and am eagerly using the 5 phrases I know in Lingala (local language) to greet everyone in the morning (I promise my repertoire will expand now that I have hired a private Lingala tutor to meet me two times a week).

I originally had more thoughts to share about working in the NGO world, about the unnecessary skepticism that people like to have towards private investments in developing countries, about Congolese sentiment towards Chinese people (a little survey I’ve taken on to carry out whenever I meet new people), and about life in the Congo in general… but since this e-mail has taken on a lighter note, I will save it for another time. Now, before I end this already-too-long e-mail, I shall leave with you two of my best moments so far in Kinshasa.

1) I SHOOK PAPA WEMBA’S HANDS. And yes, this deserves to be in caps, because if you know African music, you know Papa Wemba. One could say that Papa Wemba is the soul of Congolese music, which is the soul of Central African beats, which…is the soul of African music. How I came to shake his hands? Teehee, I will leave this in suspense.

2) While in Jardin D’Eden, a very cheeky/cheesey weekend getaway for Congolese, on a boat in the river, I was asking D whether Ivoirien music, another huge music influence, is played in the Congo. The Congolese in front of me turned around, first asked me if I listened to Ivoirien music, and then asked me if …I were Ivoirien. (??!!!) Now, really. I am quite sure there is a part of me that screams African.

Voila, my sincere greetings to you all, and when you have time, do drop me a line, because you know I live on those few lines you send to me even if I don’t reply you directly.
