---
layout: post
title: "Update from the Field"
date: 2009-08-31
---
So here I am, finally in Kinshasa, the DRC. It still feels a little surreal to have closed a five-year chapter of my life, and to start a new one in a completely foreign (and very foreign) place. The past five years in the US have been nothing short of an adventure. When I look back, it is incredible how so many opportunities were opened up for me, and how so many people were part of this adventure, helping me along the way. Here is a big thank you to you who have been part of my life these past five years.

My five years in the US have been an incredible blessing, and I am only certain that without these five years, I would not have made it out here to Kinshasa. If you asked me even three years ago, the idea of being in Africa would not even cross my mind. But I guess that’s how amusing God’s surprises are. For those of you who don’t know, after my 3-month adventure in Cameroon post-undergrad (which really started with a rather random idea), I abruptly switched from China Studies to African Studies at Johns Hopkins SAIS where I did my graduate studies. I learned Africa from scratch, but along the way, I found more and more reasons to continue studying Africa (which I could most certainly give you a list, if you ask me). When I came back from my summer internship in southern Congo, I felt reaffirmed that this was what I wanted to do. I was fortunate enough to be offered this opportunity to be part of a fellowship with an international non-profit organization a month before graduation – certainly more than a blessing in this tough economic environment to have job security before graduation. When theyfirst offered me the position in April, it came with a vague placement of “Central Africa” which really could mean Nigeria, Cameroon, Burundi, Rwanda, Central African Republic or DR Congo. I was already quite excited since this is the region of Africa in which I am most interested. When they finally told me that I will be placed in Kinshasa, DR Congo, it felt like I had certainly hit the jackpot. There was no placement that I thought could be any better. Just looking back the past five years, with every decision I made, every step I took, I saw an undeniable pattern: I come up with a random, if not outlandish, idea, I plan my way towards it, and God surprises me with an opportunity even better than what I had wished for.

With this fellowship, I will be here, theoretically, for one year. During this period, I will spend time in different areas of program management and learn as much as I can about running development projects. If I pass my evaluations mid-way through this year, I will be able to look for a new full-time position within the agency, in any of the 100+ country offices it has in the world.

I am sorry to those of you to whom I wasn’t able to say goodbye in person. The months ensuing graduation was no less than a whirlwind – after a fantastic week-long vacation on the beach with my fellow graduates, I started working two part-time positions in DC while wrapping up my life there and packing everything up. I then went back home for a little less than 3 weeks, came back to DC for a few days, and headed straight to orientation– which I must add that I was incredibly, incredibly humbled and impressed by my colleagues whom I had met for the first time. All of them had years and years of experience behind them (on average 5+!), two of them had PhDs, and there I was, a fresh graduate, with no full-time experience apart from my internships, sitting there wondering how on earth I had made it among these 25 other fellows going to random corners of the world with the organization. Two days after the weeklong orientation, I was shipped out to Kinshasa.

Congo is not for the faint of heart, and it certainly has a way of proving itself every time. After a very long and circuitous journey, I finally made it to Kinshasa, an overwhelmingly large and chaotic city. First, a two-hour delay on the runway in Washington Dulles because of air traffic, which would have certainly made my two other colleagues (one heading to Malawi and the other to Burundi) and I miss our connections in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia (I originally had a 45-minute layover…) if it were not for Ethiopian Airlines holding up all the connecting flights for us. Then, after being ushered onto my connection for Brazzaville, Republic of the Congo, we were stuck in the Brazza airport for 3 hours because our tires were flat, and during which some drunken Congolese tried to get into a fight with the flight attendants because they felt that they deserved monetary compensation for the delay. Ah, Congo! Voila, after a 5-hour delay, and an 11-minute flight from Brazza to Kinshasa, I arrived in Ndjili Airport and was picked up by organization. I should be thankful that at least the worst of my dreams was not realized – I went through immigration and customs smoothly without being asked for extortions.

First impressions of Kinshasa are very hard to describe – on the one hand, I am tempted to say that the city is downtrodden, rundown and very, very ugly, but at the same time, for those of you who are familiar with Congolese history, you will know that the city was once dubbed Kin la belle (Kin for Kinshasa, the beautiful), and the Paris of Central Africa. One certainly sees traces of the former glory that once made this city. For the few of you who know Yaounde, Cameroon, or Lubumbashi, DRC, two of my other “reference points” for African cities, Kinshasa is nothing like it. The city is big, very, very big – and sprawling. Quartier Bastos, the expat neighborhood in Yaounde, is a small, comfortably sized area where one could easily walk around – and walk out of. Here in Kin, la Gombé, where all expats and upper level government officials live, all embassies, NGOs, government buildings are, is a city in itself. Boulevard 30 Juin, is a huge, wide road, three blocks away from my house, that cuts through la Gombé straight to downtown. It would be the Champs Elysée of Kinshasa, if it were not lined up by sewage on the side, and grey, industrial-looking buildings that screamed the 60s.

Memories are selective. It often selects the best memories and condenses it into short clips that are stored in your head. And so, as I look back, I remember the good times of roaming through West and Northwest Cameroon, perhaps somewhat unwisely, on crowded buses, sharing the same bed with my good friend Edwin and his 5 other cousins in that village in Cameroon, braving a dish of caterpillars in southern Congo, flagging down shared taxis and visiting friends in the Anglophone quarters in Yaounde…memories of integration and assimilation, and true cultural learning and adaptation. Yet, it is more difficult to remember that adjusting into life in an African city often takes weeks, and building that network of local and expatriate friends also takes weeks and weeks, given the pace of things here. Having become exactly a week old in Kinshasa, I am, of course still in the adjustment and transition stage. The city is overwhelmingly big, as I mentioned, and accessibility is a huge problem because one cannot walk and wander around and explore like in Yaoundé or hop into shared taxis because of security concerns and hassle on the street. My apartment is also not really close to anything except for the office, and I will not be able drive until a month later when my driver’s license is ready (not that I am looking forward to driving in this city, though this is the only way one gets around…). Alas, I will be homebound for the month, which majorly impairs my course of integrating into life here. Nonetheless, I am still extremely grateful that I am here, this is truly a unique opportunity. Adjustments take time, especially in a place like this, but I am quite sure that I will be telling stories of my explorations in Kinshasa not before long.

On the work front, things are going well. I have, so far, not been thrown into the chaotic Fellow experiences I have heard from many (God forbid that should happen…). My supervisor has just transferred from Afghanistan to the DRC a few months ago, so there will be lots to learn from her. She is also systematic, directed and structured – and it seems like she wants my Fellow experience to be the same way. I’ve already been told that I may have the chance to be part of an agricultural project to travel down to the South and help out our Lubumbashi office – this is very exciting since every soul I know in the DRC is in the South, and I could revisit those good ol’ mining days. I am still crossing my fingers to have the chance to go to the East. Meanwhile, I’ve been tasked with a mapping project – to scientifically map out all of our project areas in a presentable way to donors and the public. It sounds administrative and mundane at first glance, but those of you who know me well will know that maps are a big thing for me. Also, apparently, GIS mapping is a growing interest in humanitarian and development work. More and more organizations are using user-friendly GIS software to map out areas of needs, location of refugees, water sources etc. I started doing some research and it is incredible how much one could do with the freewares like Google Earth and MapWindow out there.

I am afraid this e-mail is already all too long. I shall stop here, and wait for the next time when I have more exciting news to tell. In the meantime, please, please write if you have time! I thrive on messages from you all with the slow days here, and it would be doing me a great favor just to be able to hear from you, even if just a few words. I am sorry I cannot e-mail you all individually –Internet is still rather limited for now, but I will certainly try my best.
