---
layout: post
title: "Update from the Field IV"
date: 2011-01-4
---
On my way back from vacation in Zambia as I was stopping through Addis Ababa, Ethiopia for a night of transit, I met a mother carrying a toddler traveling from Juba, southern Sudan back to her current home in Manitoba, Canada.  It was the first time she had returned to Sudan since she left 21 years ago.  When civil war broke out, she fled with her family to Khartoum, northern Sudan, and left shortly afterwards for studies in India.  Eventually, she made Canada her home.  Cause of return?  Her brother’s marriage.

She told me on our short bus ride to the hotel how exciting it was to see all the new developments in Juba since she left 21 years ago, and how amazing it was to celebrate her brother’s wedding and Christmas with her family.  It did not sound like southern Sudan, at least, not the southern Sudan I had in mind, with people anxiously waiting for the referendum on January 9, 2011 that could make or break their homeland.

And then I remembered that this is how people lived.  This is how we cope with the troughs in our lives.  I asked her about the referendum and the general atmosphere in southern Sudan.  She told me that of course people were worried, and of course some families have already started moving to Kenya or Uganda.  But life goes on, and people find reasons to celebrate.  We remember, but we don’t stop our lives to mourn.  Just like in Eastern Congo or Northern Congo where I work, the Nicholas Kristof image might be of rape, of looting, of anarchy and chaos, but having lived in this country for a year and a half now, I know that people still wake up to work, people still celebrate birthdays, Christmas, New Year, people still watch their favorite football teams on TV.  Life doesn’t stop, and that is part of human resilience.  That brief encounter reminded me why I had wanted to go to these challenging corners of the world: it was precisely to understand human nature at its core.  What about human nature, you ask?  Well, resilience, something that I felt like growing up in the comforts of a developed world I had not fully grasped.

2010 was a difficult year.  In fact, it had only hit me yesterday as I was talking to a friend online that it was a very difficult year.  I moved to Goma, Eastern Congo, a place of my dreams since graduate school in January 2009 as a program manager and started organizing a series of seed fairs in a whirlwind based on my sole experience of seeing one seed fair only a month ago.  I was sent to Dungu, Northern Congo, possibly one of the most difficult corners of the country I have visited (after having been to 7 out of 11 provinces of the DRC!) to start the organization’s first field presence in the area and struggled with a series of logistical challenges.  Dealing with isolation and loneliness.  I visited a close friend in Vietnam and witnessed life slipping away from her (only to have danced with her jovial self on the beach just a year ago), and shortly received news of her death.  It was a hard, hard year.

But the reason it had only struck me a few days into the new year how hard 2010 had been was because there were all those things I celebrated and selectively remembered so well in my head: arriving in Goma full of energy, seeing the Switzerland-esque rolling green hills of Masisi Territory in North Kivu the first time, nonchalantly chatting with Tim, a field agent, about macroeconomic theory (yes, very nerdy) on a long hike from the village back to the town during a field visit, picking fresh and sweet green peas grown from the seeds we distributed directly from the fields, riding motorcycles, learning to kill a chicken, killing a chicken, making samosas and pineapple fried rice from scratch in a remote corner of the Congo, climbing the volcano, seeing mountain gorillas, seeing 5 shooting stars on the same night, looking forward to my 4km run every day, making new friends, fulfilling a teenage dream of kayaking in the Norwegian fjords, reconnecting with friends and family at home…  It was all these big and small things that kept 2010 moving.

People wonder how we manage in high stress environments as humanitarian workers in conflict zones.  I wonder myself, sometimes.  In fact, as I was enjoying vacation in Lusaka 2 weeks ago briefly, I wondered how I was able to live in a city that didn’t have 3 shopping malls next to me, that didn’t have roads without potholes… You just do.  And, let’s be completely honest here.  How difficult is it really, when you have a decent house to live in, you can go to restaurants (albeit a limited selection) , you can even buy tortellini from the super market if you’re willing to pay $13 for a bag?  I remember slightly snickering when I overheard some aid workers in Zambia complaining the dysfunctional state of things in the country and how frustrating it is to work there.  Then I thought, my friend, you do not know what dysfunctional is.  But then, I checked myself and thought again, that is probably what an aid worker in Somalia would say to me, or even a displaced family in one of our intervention zones would say.

I have it pretty easy.

But even with that, I admit there are times that the “missing things” in my life become painstakingly disconcerting, and I start re-evaluating my priorities in life.  What is important?  What is worth giving up?

As I plunged into my end of year reflections, I realized that 2011 will be a year of changes.  It will be a year of new opportunities and new challenges.  Most importantly, it will be a new year of learning.

This “field update” isn’t quite like the previous ones – there really haven’t been too many new changes since I last wrote: Operations in Dungu continue to be challenging, but we celebrate our daily triumphs (like getting a car finally!).  I continue to shuttle between Goma and Dungu on tiny 9-seater planes.  What is new is that the new year has arrived and new energy has come to fill those empty gas tanks I was running on towards the end of 2010.

Wish you all a happy and fruitful 2011.

PS: Pictures of Victoria Falls where I just visited the week of Christmas.  With Victoria Falls, I’ve managed to keep an unwritten tradition for the 4th year of visiting some sort of world heritage around this time of the year.  2010 Victoria Falls, 2009 Serengeti & Ngorongoro Crater, 2008 Machu Picchu, 2007 Teotihuacan!
