---
layout: post
title: "Update from the Field: 10(+) Years Later"
date: 2010-09-09
---
On the first day after I turned 24 this year, I climbed Mount Nyiragongo, one of the few active volcanoes in the world where you can climb to the summit and look down into a cauldron of fire – a fiery lava lake.

I am not particularly superstitious, but I believe in signs.  And witnessing one of the most incredible sights in the world, to me, it seems like it ought to be a good year of 24.

And it was, and has been a good year.

From Machu Picchu to Serengeti, it has been an incredible year of opportunities.

On the New Year’s Eve of 2009, I was standing on the ridges of the Peruvian Amazon rainforest staring down at one of the most mysterious ruins in the world, Machu Picchu, at the crack of down.  A year later, the same day, I find myself camping at the edge of Ngorongoro Crater, contemplating at the endless horizon, after a day with the most amazing wildlife in the world.

So really, the year has been an extraordinary one, from Peru to Bolivia to Chile to finishing SAIS and to landing on a job in the Congo, it could not have been better.

Except, after three months living and working in the depths of the jungle in the Democratic of the Congo, I realized I had failed to recognize the other part of the supposed sign from Mt. Nyiragongo: anything fantastical will come with hard, hard work and challenges.

The hike up Mt. Nyiragongo was an arduous one.  I had just returned from the field after days of seed fair distributions to returnees from the conflict in a part of North Kivu, Eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo – exhausted, emerging cold.  Climbing a 3000+ m volcano was probably not the smartest idea.  But it was a once-in-a-lifetime experience, ideal company, birthday present, so, what the heck.  6 hours of hike through dense bushes, then rain, then a steep uphill stretch where you curse yourself until you reach the summit and stare down at the red, hot lava lake, and you say it was all worth it.

There is probably no better metaphor than this for the past months of adventures in the DRC.

It has been a very, very long time since last wrote – busy, lazy, excuses, whatever you name it, and so, so, so many things have transpired since the last time I wrote that I don’t even know what to highlight and where to spare you the details anymore.  I don’t know if it is just me, but when I travel, especially on road travel, I find myself thinking in “paragraphs” – I speak to myself in my head in lines that I imagine I would write down when this road trip would finally end and I could put my pen to paper.  The truth is, I’ve started writing this letter many many times in my head now, but it was only until my most recent field mission, sitting in the back of a truck on a bumpy dirt road, that I finally felt like I have found the right words to pen down these months of adventures.

If I recall correctly, the last time I wrote I was still on my fellowship based in Kinshasa.  In January 2010, I took on a full-time program manager position in Goma, Eastern DR Congo.  And then it was a whirlwind of events.

Goma was everything I had dreamt of – crazy, extreme, dynamic, unstoppable.  I remember the first time I came to Goma was in November 2009, in transit to Bukavu, south of Lake Kivu.  I had fallen in love instantly.  It was a surreal feeling standing on streets covered with volcanic rocks in the city I had only read so much in books, papers when I was studying the conflict closely as a student in graduate school.  Half of the city was obliterated by the Nyiragongo eruption in 2002, yet houses, businesses had sprung up 8 years later in that same half.  So much life, so much activity, yet so much pain and suffering underneath.  It was a city of strength and resilience.

Goma was a paradise for a young humanitarian like me.  The learning opportunities were endless.  There was always something going on – this meeting to go to, that person to meet.  The situation was complex, and for better or for worse, Goma felt like the forefront of humanitarian aid having been entrenched in complex emergency (humanitarian lingo for “conflict”) for over a decade now.  In a sad way, it was something of an NGO playground.  I had come in to our Goma office to manage a new emergency food security project and an ongoing peacebuilding project (the latter didn’t quite happen for one reason or another) – and what did I have under my belt?  Well…the experience of being an observer at one seed fair only 2 months before!  All this meant that there was an incredible amount to learn, and I felt like a dry piece of foam soaking up water.  I could continue to learn as long as I was willing to put in the effort and time.  Our office was overstretched, and there was little time for guidance.  It was all up to me to figure it out.  And so I worked, and worked, and worked a lot, loving every moment of it.

Truth be told, the allure of Goma was also what outsiders criticize as the “typical” humanitarian scene.  I could be in mesmerizing Masisi Territory over the week – rolling green hills, cattle scattered across, absolutely gorgeous like Switzerland, but by the weekend, I could be back in Goma town.  The population was young, bright, fun – people worked hard, very very hard, but also partied hard.  It was a bizarre and extreme place.

I must have done something right along the road, because shortly after I had organized our 6 seed fairs for 3500 beneficiaries (seed fairs is an alternative method to provide seeds to beneficiaries as opposed to direct distributions, I won’t go into it here), in April, I was asked by the country program if I was willing to take on a new position – a bigger challenge this time: to be based in an area where the organization had no presence and implement a one-year food security project in a drastically different emergency context (you must be wondering just how many emergency contexts there are in the DRC…).

Leaving behind Goma was hard – for all the reasons I had mentioned.  I loved working in Goma.  I loved the pulse, I loved the landscape, I loved the people, I loved the complexity.  But it was true that a part of me felt like I hadn’t “roughed it out”.  I was learning an incredible amount every single day in Goma, but after the seed fairs, I also felt like the challenge was leveling off, and I needed something new to be able to keep learning and advancing personally.  In the end, the young, ambitious part got the better of me and I agreed to spearhead our operations in Dungu, a small town set in the middle of the Congolese jungle, only 180km from the Sudanese border.

In May 2010, I made my first trip to Dungu.  From the outset, I knew it would be challenging – just how much of a challenge, I wasn’t quite sure.  Haut Uélé District (in Province Orientale) where Dungu is located has been plagued by the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) from Uganda since 2006.  In the past years, the area has seen some of the worst massacres by the LRA – scores of villagers killed by LRA brutally, children abducted, houses burnt down.  (If you are interested, I direct you to an excellent report written by the Human Rights Watch, The Trail of Death – an awfully painful account of the last Christmas massacre.  It took me days to finish reading it) The result is masses of terrified Congolese displaced to where security exists – pretty much a relative term as attacks and abductions continue to be reported daily in the region, even where there is military presence.  The context of Haut Uélé is completely different from North Kivu where the lines are blurry and political divisions change by day.  Here, the line is clear: brutal LRA soldiers conducting massive human rights abuses on innocent populations.(For those who are worrying, particularly my parents – Dungu town where I live is very safe.  All attacks are outside of town, and we do not go outside of town unless there is military escort)

My job in Dungu was to work with our local partner, Caritas Dungu, to implement a food security project that involved the distribution of seeds and tools, training in improved farming techniques, and protection strategies to ensure safe access to fields.  The project also included the training of our local partner to increase their capacity in responding to emergencies.

Dungu is a logistical nightmare – isolated, poor roads, added with insecurity made the task seem almost impossible.  First, we had to tackle the purchase and transport of seeds and tools from Uganda, through Sudan (yes, through Sudan!), to the Congo.  Then there was communications – phone networks worked 70% of the time, I had no permanent set up which meant I had to rely on other NGOs for Internet (walking or biking to other offices!). When the seeds and tools finally arrived, we had to mobilize (possibly all existing!) trucks in Dungu to transport 100T of seeds to be distributed to beneficiary households.  Then there was security, road access, military escort… For a while, it felt like I was dealing with crisis after crisis.  I was angry, frustrated, tired, and this goddamn distribution just wouldn’t end (or start, for that matter).  I cursed myself for taking up a crazy job like that.

A week ago I came back from my first mission out to the field in Haut Uélé, leading the team out to finally carry out our distributions at a town called Duru.  From the beginning it was a frustration trying to put this trip together, and I started to wonder if this would ever happen.  There was securing military escort, there was rain …

So, we finally set out to the field, 5 in a car, with a truck of 40T slowly ploughing through from behind…only to be stuck 14km out of Dungu town, not even an hour of travelling had gone by!  In short, 90km took us 3 days.  We were stuck in the mud numerous times.  We slept on the floor of a chapel one night, in the back of our truck on top of our seeds another.  When, on the third day, we finally arrived in Duru, we arrived at a strange sight: people were crying on the side of the road.  It was not long after when we learned that just the night before, 5 LRA elements had attacked a household of 9 only 500m away from the UN Peacekeeping base – 3 were killed, 3 were abducted, and 3 ran away.  Duru was massacred 2 years ago when LRA came into the town, rounded up children in school, burnt down buildings, killed and abducted people – but it has been a very long time since an attack had occurred inside the town.  For the first time in my life, I could say that I saw fear in people’s eyes, and I will never forget that look.

I happened to be in town when a Human Rights Watch investigation was taking place.  The investigator had gone with military to track down the bodies of the 3 innocent Congolese killed by the LRA.  The killing was brutal – pierced, beaten up.  Living in poverty already, these people have their lives threatened by uncalled for attacks of the LRA.

Because of the delay in our travels, I was unable to supervise a distribution in the end unfortunately.  The team was set to work, however, and as of yesterday, Sep 8, I finally got word that we had finished distribution at our final site.

I end my email (even for me, this is too long) here with a little revelation I had when I was on vacation.  In June, just shortly after I had come back from my first mission in Dungu, I went on vacation to Berlin and Scandinavia.  I loved Berlin to bits, it was everything I wanted in a city.   From Dungu to Berlin it was such a shock, I started asking myself what possessed me to put myself in an isolated, difficult place?  Being in the midst of convenience, good transport, great food, it took some time to find the answer …but then I had a revelation:  I cared.  Until the day I wake up and realize that I no longer cared about what I was doing, it was still worth it.  And when that day comes, it will be the day I move to live in Berlin. 😉

I am writing this on the plane from Addis Ababa to Hong Kong.  By the time it gets out to you, I should already be in Hong Kong.  If you are in the area as well, let me know!  Would love to catch you after my long absence.

PS: A picture of the lava lake in Nyiragongo just to give you a sense of what I am talking about.
