---
layout: post
title: "Update from the Field: On Loss"
date: 2020-08-31
---
Shafi Ahmadi, a gregarious man with a round face, runs a barber shop with a blue door next to his house in Bamiyan, Afghanistan. His shop is on the way back to our office/guest house, and I visit him maybe once every one or two months for a trim. Shafi barely speaks English, and my Dari is severely limited to names of vegetables I buy in the market, yet, somehow, we manage to communicate – usually with lots of hand signs and laughter. He laments over my lack of Dari and profusely apologizes for his limited English, to which I respond with profuse apologies of my own. This sequence typically ends with him asking me random words in Chinese: his latest favorite is “shuài,” which translates to handsome from Mandarin. He now comically shouts “Shuài! Shuài!” every time I pass by his shop.

Shafi’s barber shop faces a cemetery. On one of my first visits, he told me about his father. Piecing together three things: his finger pointing to the cemetery, his hand motioning on his neck imitating beheading, and him saying Taliban, I understood that his father was killed by the Taliban when they captured Bamiyan and was buried in the cemetery in front.

I think of that encounter often, because it reminds of the lessons that I have learned about human resilience over the years of living in places like Congo and Afghanistan, where media overwhelmingly focuses on the image of loss and devastation. One thing that has always struck me is how similar we all are, despite our dramatically different life experiences and contexts. Yes, the order and magnitude of pain and suffering in Congo is much greater, but at the end of the day, everyone celebrates their birthdays, cheers for their favorite sports teams, mourns over deaths, and rejoices over births. In face of pain and loss, like Shafi, people eventually come to terms with it and find new meaning and direction in life in their own ways. I am probably projecting a lot based on the few unintelligible “conversations” I have had with Shafi, but I feel that his ever-positive nature exemplifies the resilience I have come to witness in people.

But what happens when you experience loss personally, when you are no longer just an observer? How do you make sense of it? How long does it take to process grief before you “become resilient”?

Late fall last year, sitting around the bukhari that warmed the room in a field office in a remote part of the country with my Afghan colleagues after dinner, we watched the news in Dari. I couldn’t understand anything, but footages of protests, teargas, and water cannons in Hong Kong showed up on the television. My colleagues asked me about the situation and how my family was. Unsure how to respond, I mumbled a few incoherent words back. There was some irony to the situation: here I was in Afghanistan, perceived as a chaotic place on the verge of collapse by my family and friends, watching my city literally burning and my colleagues were concerned about the safety of my loved ones.

The past year or so has been tumultuous for Hong Kong. Back in May 2019, I returned home briefly for K’s wedding. The city was on edge – a couple of protests against the extradition law that the government was trying to push through had already taken place, and Hong Kong was on the cusp of the largest protest seen ever in its territory, with over a quarter of the population out on the streets. I felt resigned that the government would ultimately have its way, but some of my friends talked about a defiance in the air that was different – something that I hadn’t picked up from being overseas.

The rest is what you have probably already read on the news: the protests continued and became increasingly widespread, the crackdowns more violent, and the government sounded more and more tone-deaf by day. I debated long about whether to return to Hong Kong for Christmas – I had initially planned to spend the holidays in Scotland at my friend B’s home like the previous year where I had been using as my “jump off point” in between assignments. As the protests intensified, I slept fitfully for nights on end, spent hours scrolling through Twitter to follow the latest developments back home, and felt sick to the stomach. I felt a moral obligation to go back, if anything just to reconnect with friends and understand what they were going through, what the city was going through; yet, at the same time, I felt a bit like a voyeur not having actually lived in Hong Kong for years. Eventually I decided to go back and was glad I did – I caught up with friends, I tried to get a pulse of what was happening socially and politically, albeit superficially, but failed to realize that it would be the last time seeing Hong Kong as I knew it growing up (or at least semblance of it as things had already been changing for a good six to seven years).

Few of us anticipated that the tides would turn so rapidly. While the government’s stance hardened further as the protests dragged on, the National Security Law (NSL) that formally passed in June 2020 effectively shut down any dissenting voices in the city immediately. Overnight, the concerns of my peers in Hong Kong escalated to “can I still say/write/tweet x?” “should I move my entire family overseas?” “do I need to move my savings offshore?” The scope of the NSL is so broad and all encompassing that practically anything done by anyone anywhere that ticks off the government can be construed as a violation and can result in imprisonment. My peers and I all spent hours combing our online presence, locking our social media, changing the names to our accounts to gain some degree of anonymity for protection and at least some sense of security psychologically (because let’s face it, when surveillance is the name of the game and how much can you really go under the radar?). The tables were turned on the opposition swiftly – activists fled, police closed in on the loudest ones and arrested them either on rioting charges or quite directly for breaking the NSL.

Of course, in no way can I equate the suffering that Afghans or Congolese people have endured over years of civil war with anything happening in Hong Kong. Yes, there is severe inequality in Hong Kong, housing prices are crushing people, elderly poor is a serious issue, etc. etc., but overall we are privileged and we have our basic needs covered. Nevertheless, I have come to realize that pain and loss are deeply personal and there is no competition for who loses the most. Even though I hadn’t properly lived in Hong Kong for 16 years now – over half of my life – I had always taken for granted that I could go back to see childhood friends and family, to walk those streets where I bought my curry fish balls, to sit on that magnificent 10-minute Star Ferry ride across Victoria Harbor that makes me fall in love with the city over and over again, to hike those verdant hills with views that never cease to take my breath away. I had taken Hong Kong for granted as “home,” even if just psychologically. For the first time in my life, I felt that I had to think twice about going home, about posting some comment on the latest political developments, about retweeting some opposition statement with which I identified. It has been wildly confusing and disorienting. How do you make sense of having a place that you call home, that make up such a prominent part of your identity being yanked out from you?

I also felt deeply guilty: here I was almost 5,000km away, ironically “safe” in Afghanistan from all the political shitstorm in Hong Kong when I have friends who are genuinely concerned about their future and those of their kids. What right did I have to feel grief?

Yet, we are all experiencing grief – a collective sense of grief over the loss of what we once knew and had – and there was no grief more legitimate than the other. People talk about the different stages of grief and I have come to realize how non-linear one processes grief. One moment I feel completely resigned and depressed. One moment I read something on the news and wonder, “Is this for real?”  One moment I feel full on rage – at everyone and anyone – why have so few friends who know I am from Hong Kong personally asked about how me, my friends, my family are doing? Why don’t people seem to care? Sure, no one is starving to death, but all those “liberal values” and “freedom” that the west claims to defend are literally being stripped away in Hong Kong. Then again, that loss is so deeply personal to those of us from Hong Kong and affects us in such a personal way that, of course, we are the only ones who genuinely give a damn, especially in the world of COVID, when everyone has their own full plate of worries already. Everyone has only so much bandwidth to care.

This grieving process made me reflect a lot on my work overseas as well. At what point does it become voyeuristic? How can we genuinely say that we are personally invested in “X” (substitute with any country) when we as “expatriates” can whisk off back to our home countries as soon as things become slightly uncomfortable? I recently read a tweet that said something along these lines: “for those of you who are ‘experts’ in X, keep in mind that for you it is a cause but for us it is our lives.” These are questions that I have thought about often over the years, but in the midst of many ongoing reflections and discussions about race and equity, especially in the aid sector, I feel more acutely aware of how we need to do better to give local voices and actors the center stage, how we need to actively step down from the role as a protagonist and support in solidarity.

COVID-19 also heightened the profound sense of loss I felt over Hong Kong. When the pandemic hit Afghanistan in mid-March, my boss and I quickly encouraged our entire team of international staff to return home before flights were suspended indefinitely. My boss encouraged me to consider seriously doing the same, but in the end, I elected to stay: partly out of a sense of responsibility and solidarity, but also partly out of practicality – where would I go really? I was grateful to have friends who welcomed me, but there wasn’t anywhere I felt immediately equipped to go into lockdown and comfortable imposing on someone indefinitely, until whenever those strict measures were to be lifted. Having moved around for 10+ years (15+ years if we include my foray overseas in university in the US), I had already felt a nagging sense of rootlessness in recent years, but never had I felt it more strongly than during these pandemic times.

Last year I began to plan for a new project in life that would have had me hung up my field boots for a few years, call a place home, and hopefully grow some roots. As life would have it, the world plunged into the chaos of a pandemic. I sent almost all colleagues home on the day I turned 34, buckled down with my boss in Afghanistan, worked harder than I ever had before, and completely changed everything I had planned. While all of these changes made logical sense, I won’t deny that I am still feeling a sense of loss, though made better knowing that I now have a full year to prepare for what will come. I am not going to say too much more for fear of jinxing it (again?). I hope in the next updates I’ll be able to share more. For now, I'll be staying in Afghanistan.

I have been particularly rubbish at staying in touch the past months because of how insane work pace became due to COVID-19, but I hope you and your loved ones are doing well despite these challenging times.

Best,
Joseph
 

PS: Attached is one of my favorite pictures from our COVID-19 response work in Afghanistan.
PPS: If you are receiving this note, it is because either you've received past updates, or because I thought you might be interested. 
PPPS: If you are interested in reading past two updates, you can find them at:
