---
layout: post
title: "Update from the Field: 10(+) Years Later"
date: 2020-02-09
---
In the windswept, arid southwest corner of Bolivia, the Atacama Desert and the Andean Altiplano are dotted with colorful lagoons, white expansive salt flats, snow-capped volcanoes, and curious rock formations carved by nature over millions of years. Here, time stands still and the landscape is austere. Immediately, in the face of a vast expanse of emptiness, under the limitless starry universe, you feel minuscule. Nature, transforming at glacial speed, seems completely unfazed by bustling human activity only a few hours away. That stillness forces you to think about what matters in life.

In late February 2018, I was fortunate to have a group of friends from Hong Kong, old and new, who made the excruciatingly long journey to northern Chile to visit me. With visitors, I had the excuse to revisit the famous Uyuni Salt Flats (Salar de Uyuni) just across the border in Bolivia. I had been there on a memorable solo backpacking trip in 2008, and in ten years’ time, it had become a trendy place to visit – popular with Instagrammers capturing the eerie and surreal quality of the salt flats. During the rainy season, the white salt flats are covered by water that reaches your ankles. The perfect reflection of the blue skies blur the horizon, creating a landscape that seems out of this world. Even on a second visit, it was hard not to be amazed by this sight.

The trip was just as I had remembered from ten years ago – four days and three nights, bumpy roads in a Jeep, simple meals, barebone guesthouses, heavy blankets, and cold nights through the Bolivian outback. Even with growing tourism over the past decade, little seemed to have changed. While the Chilean border post got an upgrade, the Bolivian immigration office was the same small cement house from ten years ago. Uyuni felt very much like the same dusty town I had seen. I thought about governance, institutions, economic development, and (in)equitable growth. Even more so, however, on the long car rides, I thought about the passage of time in a deeply personal way – how have I changed in the past ten years, and what events, people, and experiences shaped who I am today? I realized, then, that more than just a trip to reconnect with friends and revisit old places, it was a trip of self-reflection that came at the cusp of another life change.

I had started writing this reflection two years ago but struggled to put words onto paper. So much had happened since then – I left Chile after two challenging years, I dabbled in the idea of setting up a home base somewhere in Europe, and I jumped back into the fray of the humanitarian sector. Yet, in the midst of the frenzy, in the back of my mind I knew I had to find a way to take stock of things. It’s too easy to let life slip by in front of you and act like a passenger with no control of where you are being steered.

But where does one start? I went back to the very first Update from the field piece I wrote in 2009, a week into what would become a three-year stint in Congo that transformed my worldview, and read through the eight reflection pieces I had written over the course of 13 years. (You can read them here: https://longtimenosee.wordpress.com. Reading them now, they are at times embarrassing, naive, cringe-worthy, and possibly insensitive, but I decided not to take them down because they are an honest reflection of me at that point in time.) I found a wide-eyed 23-year-old, fresh out of graduate school, stepping off the plane at N’djili Airport in Kinshasa, excitable and impressionable to anything and everything. In those years, just as I had written in my 2016 reflection, I sought experiences that pushed me out of my comfort zone. Life was an adventure and I was ready to take on whatever it had in store for me.

That spirit of adventure led me to meet new people and learn new things. I grew personally and professionally. Yet, it was also partly that spirit of adventure that brought me to the brink of burn out in Dungu, a northern Congolese town, at the time plagued by incursions from the Lord’s Resistance Army, where I had spent almost a year. I eventually learned to see life not as a series of exciting adventures but a pathway to self-discovery and personal growth, each step to a greater sense of self-awareness.

Sometimes I think about what might have happened had I stayed in Washington, DC after I graduated from SAIS – I might have built a community of friends in DC; I might have developed a routine of going to work, maybe yoga, the gym after, drinks on Fridays, brunch with friends on the weekends; I might have dated more – maybe even in a stable relationship by now. But I don’t regret those years in Congo: pushed to my own boundaries in Congo, I learned to open up and become vulnerable with the people I had around me. It was in those years that I forged some of the deepest friendships in my life; friends who made me feel comfortable in my own skin. It was in those years that I became me.

Congo turned into Phoenix, Indonesia, Chile. As I read through the reflection pieces, I found myself to have gradually become a more measured individual (or so I hope). I learned to be still with myself (copious amounts of alone time in rural, remote Congo can do that to you). I found myself more focused, less distracted (although I know those of you who see me hopping from one place to another might not agree…it’s all relative; relative to the 23-year-old me 😉), but ironically less patient – less patient with bullshit, with people who have no bearing on my life, because I began having this overwhelming sensation that life was just too short to waste time on things and people that didn’t matter, too short to feel like a falling leaf, drifting in the air, and too short not to show the people you love and value that you really care about them. Above all, I found that I no longer sought breadth in life – breadth of experiences, new people. I started to crave for depth – depth in my work, depth in relationships I formed, depth of understanding the people I met and places I went to.

Maybe it was this self-realization that made the disillusionment of Chile particularly difficult to overcome. I had moved to Chile in 2016 with the resolution that it was not just “another adventure”: I found peace the months I was in Argentina and had resolved to make Latin America home (except I had not realized that, despite being neighbors, Chile was a very different Latin America from Argentina – the Andes might as well have been the Pacific separating the two). I knew the dusty mining town of Calama would not be home, but I saw it as a means to an end – an end that would involve putting some roots down in a place that made sense somewhere in this sphere of the world. For a variety of reasons that I won’t get into here, the cautious optimism that brought me to Calama slowly turned into disillusion. That insidious change ate me alive – I became depressed, I stayed in my apartment over weekends, sometimes in bed. I left in April 2018, when I finally concluded that I could no longer “make it work” for myself in Chile. Immediately, I felt light, but also lost – I thought I had found a place where I would no longer just be “passing through”, but, all of a sudden, Chile felt like a detour, and I was back to square one. Where would I go from there?

Ironically, despite the comfort compared to all the places I had lived, the two years in Chile were some of the loneliest and most difficult ones I have had. Still, looking back, I don’t regret the choice I made moving to Chile because, at that point, I had already realized that life was not a series of adventures, but a pathway to self-discovery, and Chile took me another step closer to clarity about what mattered to me in life, what I wanted, and what I didn’t. The experience also helped me crystallized what I had learned over seven years in the mining industry.

I took time off during the summer of 2018. Unlike previous career breaks, I no longer had the desire to travel just for the sake of travelling (in 2012 I took time off and traveled from Congo to South Africa by road, then flew back up to Uganda and made it back down to Mozambique; in 2015 I left my job in Phoenix and spent time in Brazil/Argentina). I traveled to reconnect with friends in US, Canada, Hong Kong, and Europe, I exercised and focused on staying healthy. My good friend B and his girlfriend graciously took me in for a month in his lovely apartment in Brussels where we explored working on a book together as I dabbled in the idea of making Brussels my home-base (didn’t work out). Another friend R organized a “life celebration” for her big 40th birthday in idyllic Croatia where she brought together friends she had collected from her years in humanitarian work – Iraq, Congo, Dominican Republic, etc. I saw how friendship, even if dispersed all over the world, could be so powerful and nurturing to a person. I reconnected with A, (second) A, R & C, friends from my Dungu times after many years over a beautiful weekend outside of Geneva. I spent time in Scotland with another friend B, who kindly gave me the keys to his house to use as a “base” as I figured out what to do with my life. It was a nourishing, healing summer.

Life has a funny way of coming full circle. I eventually made my way back to Catholic Relief Services, where I had started nine years ago as a fellow in Kinshasa. During the seven years out of the humanitarian sector, I had wanted to return but hadn’t quite found the right opportunity – I missed the camaraderie, the sense of mission, the people who were curious and cared about similar things in life, even the drudgery and banality of everyday life in “the field.” This time it felt right, and it felt a bit like coming home. Still, I had hesitations – I remembered the burnout well and was acutely aware of the things in the aid world that frustrated me. So, I returned “part-time,” thinking I could dabble in other projects I had in mind while figuring out whether my seven-year fixation of returning to the sector made any sense. I took on short assignments to cover gaps in Cameroon and Nigeria.

Then, in early 2019, I arrived in Afghanistan for a three-month assignment that has now become 13 months and counting. Like how I came full circle with CRS, I came full circle with Afghanistan. In 2015, I came to Afghanistan for a visit, fully convinced that I would take a job with CRS there, only to decide against it when I left. The past year in Afghanistan has been challenging and rewarding. Yes, the circus of donors, proposals, cluster meetings, acronyms, and aid buzz words is as bewildering and maddening as it had been when I left the sector in 2011, if not more. Yes, being in a more senior role than before means more work, more responsibilities, and acting like I know what I was talking about. And yes, the limitations that life in Afghanistan places on us mean compromises with personal priorities. But overall, in the past year, I felt content. I was learning and thriving professionally in a pace I hadn’t felt in my last years in mining. I was back in a community of like-minded people. More importantly, I felt that I returned to the humanitarian sector more measured as a person with a different perspective. Afghanistan wasn’t so much an “adventure” as it was just work – my work as a project manager who happens to manage projects in Afghanistan. There was drudgery in the day-to-day work, lots of it, in fact, but there will always be drudgery in life, Afghanistan or not, and you just have to deal with it, one step at a time. Being in Afghanistan means putting certain things in life on hold, but it isn’t forever, I could choose to leave, and it is yet another step in that pathway to self-discovery. Life isn’t sustained by the sunshine and butterflies, but it’s about trying to derive learning, fulfillment, and satisfaction through the good and the bad.

As I sit in my living room in Bamiyan looking out the window to the snow-capped mountains of the Hindu Kush, the stillness of the night felt strangely familiar – similar to that stillness on the trip through the Bolivian Altiplano, to the desolation of the Atacama Desert, and to that tranquility I felt in the Patagonia, all of the places where I felt deeply introspective and connected to myself. Over the last 12 months, especially the latter half of 2019, I found myself regularly contemplating about life and where I want to steer it next. I have some ideas, and I hope the next time I write I can share them.

2019 was a challenging year – on the professional front, it was a hectic, steep learning curve that pushed my limits but made me grow; on the personal front, it was messy, confusing, and saddening at times in a way that made me retreat to my own world. A combination of these things, of being in Afghanistan, and of my preoccupation of the ongoing social movements in Hong Kong – I became especially rubbish at keeping in touch with friends. If I seemed like I had disappeared in the past year or so, it isn’t that I haven’t thought about you, but it is because I have needed a bit more space than usual to sort things out in my head. I hope you know that I value having you in my life, even if we haven’t seen or talked to each other in a while. I missed my Christmas and New Year’s greetings to people this year – Happy 2020, and I look forward to reconnecting with you individually this year as I slowly climb out of the rut of 2019.

Best,
Joseph
